---
title: Ancestors of Thomas Rife, 1780-1864
weight: 100
type: essay
---

# South Carolina

## Swiss Protestants immigrated to South Carolina.

King Charles II of England granted the Province of Carolina to the Lords Proprietors in 1663 as a business enterprise. The eight English royalists founded Charles Town in 1680 as their new colony’s center of trade and culture and its port of entry. The colony attracted a number of settlers who farmed on the coastal plain in the vicinity of Charles Town. In 1733, the South Carolina General Assembly established eleven townships along major rivers of the coastal plain to encourage immigration to the interior of the province.[^1] Among these new townships were Orangeburg and Saxe-Gotha.[^2]

The first Swiss Protestants to arrive in South Carolina settled around Orangeburg in 1735. Two years later, Swiss settlers arrived in Saxe-Gotha. Before the Swiss arrived, the region was a wilderness with only four or five English residents.[^3] The government of England encouraged immigration of protestants to the Carolinas and provided settlers with 50-acres of free land and a subsidy of twenty Pounds Sterling. [^4] In 1740, a letter written by John Peter Purry in 1735 and cosigned by a dozen German-speaking residents of the Saxe-Gotha Township, was distributed in Switzerland to encourage migration to the Township.[^5]

Partly as a result of the letter and the inducements offered by the British Crown, large numbers of Palatines (German-speaking Swiss Protestants) settled in Orangeburg, Congaree and Wateree Districts between 1740 and 1755.[^6] Between 1732 and 1744 at least eleven ships arrived in the Carolinas carrying Swiss immigrants. As late as 1765, six hundred refugee Protestants from two districts of south Germany and Switzerland (Palatine and Swabia) were sent from London to the townships in South Carolina set aside for them.[^7] It is likely that the ancestor of Thomas Rife settled in South Carolina during this period.[^8]

## Saxe-Gotha Township was the frontier of European settlement.

During the Cherokee War of 1759-1761 many of the settlers in Saxe-Gotha Township fled for safety to the towns of Ebenezer and Savannah in the colony of Georgia and to Charles Town and Purrysburg (a settlement on the coast) in South Carolina 9(458, pp. 88, 231-236). Some of the Swiss settlers never returned to their homes in Saxe-Gotha. Some were killed during the war and others moved north to Pennsylvania where conditions were safer and there were established schools and churches 10(787, pg. 14).

After their defeat, the Cherokee ceded some of their lands east of the Blue Ridge Mountains to the settlers and moved their towns further west 11(786, pg. iii) (952, pg. 7). This opened a large area of land in the Piedmont Plateau and the adjacent low country that attracted land speculators and settlers from existing settlements to the north of South Carolina. During the French and Indian Wars settlers from Virginia began moving south looking for cheap and secure land 12(458, pg. 219). A fork on the Great Wagon Road crossed the northern part of Saxe-Gotha Township and Scots-Irish families from Virginia and Pennsylvania settled in the district in the generation just prior to the American Revolution 13(457, pg. 3).

Conrod Rife and Peter Chambliss fought in the Revolutionary War. In 1775, as a result of conflicts over taxes and governance, a revolutionary government was established in Charles Town. Although many Carolinians still supported the British Crown, the Royal Governor left the Colony and South Carolina declared itself an independent state on July 4, 1776. Events in the Northern colonies soon led to the American Revolution 14(458, pp. 255, 262).
In June 1775, Conrod Rife enlisted in Captain Field Farrer’s Company of state troops at Ninety-Six Court House 15(483, pg. 815) (485). The company became one of ten companies of the 3rd Regiment of the South Carolina Line 16(482, pg. 147) (541). The 3rd Regiment consisted of volunteer, mounted riflemen who were not militiamen. The regiment was mustered into the Continental Army (known in those days as the Continental Establishment) in September 1776 17(458, pg. 351) (483, pg. xiii) and fought at the Sieges of Savannah and Charles Town. The entire 3rd Regiment, including Farrer’s company, was captured in May 1780 at Charles Town when the city surrendered to a British invasion force. After its capture, the regiment of 259 men was disbanded in January 1781 18(458, pp. 366-367) before Rife’s term of enlistment expired 19(483, pg. 815).
After the 3rd Regiment surrendered, the enlisted men were paroled and then exchanged. Many subsequently joined other regiments 20(458, pg. 367). Conrod Rife appeared on the roll of Captain Philemon Waters’ Company, 1st Spartan Regiment of Militia (Light Dragoons) soon after the 3rd Regiment disbanded 21(483, pg. 815) (484, pg. 82) (458, pg. 277). Conrad’s Compiled Military Service Record states that he served for 46 months and 21 days between August 10, 1777 and July 1, 1781 21a (1300).
In 1780, Peter Chambliss lived in Camden District, South Carolina, upstream of Saxe-Gotha Township. He enlisted in the 5th Regiment, South Carolina Line during the Revolutionary War and served from 1778 until 1781 22(483, pg. 161).
After the capture of Charles Town, the British army and its Tory militia marched towards Virginia where they launched an unsuccessful invasion of the middle Atlantic colonies. Eventually the British army surrendered at Yorktown, Virginia in October 1781 and the last British troops left Charles Town in December 1782 23(458, pg. 526).

Peter Chambliss married the widow Rife. In the 1790-1792 Federal Census, Conrod Rife was listed as living alone with one slave on a farm near Sandy Run in Orangeburg District 24(893). Sandy Run is a stream about eleven miles south of the Fall Line on the Santee/Congaree River in the old Saxe-Gotha Township 25(907). The 1790 Census does not clearly show the location of Rife’s farm but its location was determined by comparing names in the 1790 and 1800 Federal Census. In 1800, the twenty families living along Sandy Run were a German-speaking community of 119 adult men, 101 adult women, 260 children and 107 slaves 26(493).
In the 1800 Federal Census, Mary Rife was enumerated as living on the farm near Sandy Run in Lexington County, Orangeburg District that Conrod Rife occupied in 1790. In that year, she was listed as a widow with four children and two slaves; two boys and a girl less than ten years of age and one girl described as 10-15 years old. Genealogies list the two boys as William, born in 1795, and Jacob, born in 1798. The authors found no record of Conrod Rife after 1790 so it is presumed that he died before 1800.
In March 23, 1801 Polly (Mary) Rife claimed 67 acres of land in the Congaree Swamp above Beaver Creek 27(918). This may have been a land grant based on her husband’s Revolutionary War service 28(782, pg. 123).
In 1785, Peter Chambliss also received a land grant as a Revolutionary War veteran 29(782, pg. 25). In the 1800 Federal Census, he was enumerated in Lexington County on the Edisto River not far from the Rife farm on Sandy Run 30(894) (906). He was married, had two sons (Peter Corbin, aged 10 and John, aged 8), a girl (Elizabeth, aged 4) and three slaves. His wife was probably Mary Elizabeth Corbin who was born in 1771 and died in 1798 31(912, pg. 155) but by the date the census was taken he may have been courting his third wife, the widow Mary Rife.
