---
title: Preserving the Alamo, 1885-1905
weight: 900
type: essay
---
# Preserving the Alamo, 1885-1905

*“From 1885 to 1894 he was custodian of the Alamo”, “Custodian of the Alamo”, San Antonio Light, February 23, 1887*

### The Alamo, 1718-1836

A Franciscan missionary, Fray Antonio de Olivares, established Mission San Antonio de Valero (now called the Alamo) in 1718 for the Payaya Indians. The mission was a school where the Indians were taught Spanish culture and the Catholic religion.[^1] The mission enclosure was built in the form of a rectangle with living quarters for the Indians on the opposite side of a plaza from the residence of the priests and the church.[^2] Construction of the church was begun in 1744 and finished in 1757. The church’s two towers, its arched roof and the dome collapsed in 1762 because of faulty construction.[^3] Because of a shortage of labor caused by epidemics and a decline in the number of Indians living at the mission, the church was never rebuilt and remained a ruin,[^4] Disease killed so many Indian converts at the mission that by 1778 there were not enough laborers even to work the mission’s fields.[^5]

From 1690 until September 10, 1772, the Spanish Crown paid the expenses of the San Antonio missions.[^6] In August 1793, Mission San Antonio de Valero was secularized.[^7] That is, the mission and its few remaining residents were transferred from the care of missionary fathers to that of the local parish.[^8] Because of a shortage of diocesan priests, the Franciscan missionaries agreed to stay on as parish priests and the mission was administered as part of the parish of Béxar.[^9]

A cavalry company from El Alamo de las Parras (now Viesca, Coahuila) occupied the former priests’ residence ten years later.[^10] Soldiers from El Alamo occupied the mission buildings until 1813 and the priests’ residence or convent became known as the Long Barracks.[^11] By 1807, the Alamo was no longer referred to as a mission but as a Spanish fort. In August 1825, the chaplain of the company of Alamo de Parras transferred the company’s sacramental records to the church at Béxar.[^12] Between 1807 and 1812 the upper floor of the Long Barracks was used as a hospital.[^13]

By 1807, of the five missions along the San Antonio River, only Mission San José still had Indians residing on the grounds. After the last mission closed in 1823, the remaining land and irrigation rights were distributed to private individuals.[^14] The village government of Béxar (now called San Antonio) asked that the remaining unassigned land of the Mission Valero (the Alamo) be assigned to it.[^15] In September 1825, title to all the remaining mission buildings passed to the Bishop of Monterrey, whose diocese included the village of Béxar. The Church subsequently repurchased some property that had fallen into private hands.[^16]

The Spanish government closed its presidios (forts) in east Texas in 1793 and moved the settlers to Béxar. People from the Presidio of Adaes (west of Natchitoches in what is now Louisiana) were assigned land at the Valero mission. After the Alamo mission was closed in August 1793, the village of La Villita was built south of the Alamo enclosure on land that had once belonged to the San Antonio de Valero mission.[^17] Because it was on higher ground, a number of families moved west of the river after a flood in 1819. After annexation in 1845, La Villita became a German neighborhood.[^18]

### The Siege of the Alamo, 1836

In 1830 the Spanish military facilities at the Alamo were expanded onto expropriated private property.[^19] General Martin Perfecto de Cos rebuilt the fortifications at the Alamo[^20] just before surrendering it to the Texans in December 1835.[^21] There were also fortifications on Military Plaza that were staffed by a second company of troops.[^22] After the Texans captured the town, the Texan military officers abandoned the fortifications on Military Plaza in the village of Béxar because of a shortage of men and moved all their guns to the Alamo fort. The doors of the Long Barracks facing the mission plaza were blocked with rammed earth and loopholed.[^23] A loophole is an opening in a wall just large enough for a standing man to use as a firing port. A cedar post stockade, ditch and earthworks were erected at gaps in the exterior walls.[^24]

When General Santa Anna’s army arrived on the morning of February 23, 1836 the fort and the mainly American force inside was besieged.[^25] General Santa Anna made it clear to the Texans that if his army had to storm the fort, its defenders would be executed. Mexican troops were at times withdrawn from the eastern side of the fort in the hope that the defenders would take the opportunity to flee.[^26] During the siege, most of the Tejano men of Béxar who had entered the fort with the Texas Federalists and their American allies were induced to leave 27(635, pg. 55). The remaining men, mostly Americans who had only recently arrived in Texas, were prepared to die to defend the Mexican Federation and “the tri-color (flag) of 1824” 28(636, pg. 226).

In the early morning of Sunday, March 6, the fort was stormed and captured by the Mexican Centrist army 29(604, pg. 33) (659, pg. 60). There were less than two hundred men and about a dozen women and children in the fort when it was attacked. 30(604, pg. 30). Most of the women and children were sheltered in rooms on the north side of the church that were free of debris. They were away from the main fight at the Long Barracks and were not injured 31(604, pg. 36). When Colonel Travis refused to surrender the fort, Gen. Santa Anna placed a red flag on the tower of San Fernando Church, signifying “No Quarter” 32(604, pg. 184) and everyone understood that all armed men found inside the Alamo would be killed 33(659, pg. 53). During the assault the Mexican army’s band played an ancient melody (“de querella”) signaling that no prisoners were to be taken and most or all of the approximately 182 defenders were killed when the fort fell on March 6, 1836 34(633, pg. 83).
After the battle Mexican General Andrade first began to fortify the Alamo and then had his troops dismantle the fortifications before moving to join the main Mexican army at Goliad. Before surrendering to the Americans in December 1835, General Cos had torn down the remaining arches of the church and built a ramp of the debris that extended from the main door of the church to its rear. There he installed a wooden platform upon which he mounted an 18-pound cannon 35(633, pg. 19, 70) (635, pg. 32). General Andrade’s troops set the wooden platform on fire before they left for Goliad. The high walls surrounding the mission plaza were leveled, the moat or ditch filled up and the cedar pickets torn up and burnt 36(604, pg. 38). The Long Barracks and the ruins of the church were left intact 37(604, pg. 45, 55). The outer walls on the west and south sides of the plaza were actually stone or adobe soldiers’ quarters that faced the plaza. The rear of these houses formed the outer wall of the mission enclosure. These walls were left intact 38(633, pg. 149).
A visitor to the Alamo in 1842 described the Alamo as having 12 to 15 apartments, separated by stonewalls several feet thick. He understood that the defenders of the Alamo were pursued into the convent or Long Barracks and killed there 39(642, pg. 35) (633, pg. 20). He made no mention of the church that stood to one side and behind the Alamo. The old fort remained a ruin and a place where children played until about 1850 40(604, pg. 63) (259, pg. 18) (555, pg. 97). In 1845 the 2nd Illinois Regiment of the US Army built a carpentry shop inside the old walls before the regiment departed for Mexico 41(98B). For many years the only other buildings in the neighborhood were flat-roofed adobe houses just south of the Alamo in the old Barrio of Valero 42(636, pg. 34).
The US Army occupied the Alamo, 1846-1878. On January 13 and 18, 1841 the Congress of the Republic of Texas passed an act granting the mission churches and surrounding improvements to the Catholic Church 43(604, pg. 43). Shortly afterward the images of Saints Dominic and Francis were removed from the niches on the front of the Alamo church 44(633, pg. 76). The crucifix and other sacred objects had been removed to San Fernando Church long before 45(633, pg. 167).
Towards the end of 1846 the US Army took possession of the Alamo property and shortly after April 1847 began paying rent to Mr. Bryan Callaghan as agent of the Bishop 46(604, pg. 44) (658, pg. 448). The Army attempted to get possession of the fort by pre-emption but Samuel Maverick, a local resident and land speculator, convinced them that the Alamo was a mission, not a fort and therefore not public property 47(635, pg. 323). He had the site surveyed and built a house on the northwest corner of the property on land he purchased from a local resident 48(633, pg. 76) (658, pg. 451).
By 1847 only the Long Barracks, the ruined church and portions of the west and south walls (specifically the Low Barracks) remained. The US Army, under Major Babbitt, removed much of the debris from the church, built a peaked, shingled roof over the shell of the building and raised the parapet of the church to hide the peaked roof 49(604, pg. 10) (468, pp. 216). San Antonio architect John Fries, who designed the parapet extension, added two upper windows on the west face of the building 50(633, pg. 77). A peaked roof was added to the Long Barracks and it was renovated as offices 51(468, pg. 216). The old fort was used as the Quartermaster’s Depot 52(555, pg. 87) for the 8th Infantry for the next thirty years 53(465, pg. 3).
The Army built a barracks at the corner of Houston and St. Mary’s Street in San Antonio and rented the Vance Building (the Brick Building) as the Army’s Headquarters 54(555, pg. 88) (259, pg. 123) (602, pg. 2). In 1860 the US Quartermaster 8th Infantry had his office in the Brick Block which the Army rented from Vance Brothers 55(583, pg. 173). A subordinate branch of the Quartermaster Department under Captain A. W. Reynolds, Assistant Quartermaster, occupied the Alamo.
In 1860 the building fronting the common (i.e. the Long Barracks) was described as a two-story building that was used for offices, storerooms, packing rooms, saddler’s shop, harness room and a wagon shed 56(658, pg. 445). In a corral behind the Long Barracks were mule sheds. On the east side of the street behind the Long Barracks was the corral for wagons, a carpenter’s shop, a smith’s shop and the hay yard 57(583, pg. 175). The first floor of the old church building was used as a granary. The architect added a second floor to the church and R. M. Potter, a military storekeeper, occupied it. Mr. Potter had charge of the camp, garrison and clothing stores 58(583, pg. 176). The Quartermaster in San Antonio in 1860 employed over 129 persons, 820 mules, 1 horse and 198 wagons, many of them in and around the Alamo 59(583, pg. 175).
In March 1865 a flood destroyed parts of San Antonio along the San Antonio River 60(151, pg. 137) (555, pg. 113) and the Bishop asked the US Army to vacate the Alamo church so the German Catholic congregation of San Antonio could use it. Major General Merritt replied that the building was used by the Quarter Master Department for receiving grains and losing its use would be a “great inconvenience and serious loss” 61(604, pg. 44). St. Joseph’s Church was subsequently built nearby for German-speaking Catholics 62(151, pg. 161).
The Diocese no longer needed the Alamo after St. Joseph’s Church was built because of the Alamo’s proximity to the new church 63(602, pg. 24) (604, pg. 44). According to local legend the statue of Saint Anthony of Padua was removed from the lower right-hand niche on the church’s façade only after St. Joseph’s Church was built. This signified that the angels guarding the church had withdrawn their protection and that the building was no longer holy ground 64(604, pg. 57).  
On May 19, 1868 a hailstorm caused much damage in San Antonio and destroyed the shingle roofs of the Alamo buildings 65(70, pg. 46) (151, pg. 144). In 1869 US Army headquarters was moved to Austin  but was returned to San Antonio in 1875. During this time the church was still being used by the Army to store grain. In 1875 the City donated 93 acres for Post San Antonio (now Fort Sam Houston) and in May 1875 work began on the new post 66(633, pg. 214) (555, pg. 90). The first building completed at Fort Sam Houston was the Quadrangle that was occupied by the Quartermaster in January 1878 67(633, pg. 216). Shortly afterward the Army left the Alamo property 68(468, pg. 216).
The Alamo was sold for commercial use in 1879. In 1879 Honoré Grenet purchased the Long Barracks from the Catholic Church for $19,000 for use as a retail store 69(151, pg. 163). He faced the exterior with wood made to resemble a military fortress 70(468, pg. 116) (639, pg. 47). Mr. Grenet built wooden galleries around the two-story building (which had been only slightly damaged in 1836) to replicate the missing stone arcades, added towers with wooden cannon and painted the words, “The Alamo Building” on the west and south sides 71(151, pg. 158) (604, pg. 45).
Honoré Grenet died unexpectedly in 1882 and in May 1884 the estate was sold at auction to the firm of Hugo-Schmeltzer for $28,000 72(151, pg. 143) (468, pg. 219). Hugo & Schmeltzer was a wholesale distributor of groceries and liquors 73(468, pg. 220) (602, pg. 45). The firm moved their offices to Houston Street after a few years and thereafter used the Long Barracks as a warehouse 74(602, pg. 16) (188, pg. 11). Apparently Hugh & Schmeltzer continued to lease the old church as well 75(633, pg. 77).
The Alamo church was purchased by the State. In April 1881 the 18th Legislature passed an act authorizing the Governor to purchase the Alamo church building from the Bishop of San Antonio 76(90, pg. 28) (639, pg. 47). In February 1883 a committee of the 19th Legislature reported favorably to buy the Alamo church 77(151, pg. 141) (468, pg. 219) (537, pg. 129). The City Council of San Antonio adopted a resolution proposing to take charge of the Alamo church “to preserve it as a monument and prevent its desecration” by vandals on provision that the State buy the building 78(90, pg. 28) (659, pg. 85).
In March 1883 the 19th Texas Legislature passed a bill allowing the Governor to transfer the Alamo building to the City of San Antonio79(277, p. 126) (659, pg. 76). In turn the City Council authorized the mayor “to appoint some suitable person as custodian of the Alamo”. The same City Council resolution set the hours of operation of the building and the duties of the custodian and his wages. The custodian of the Alamo had the power and authority of a regular policeman 80(90, pg. 28).  
On September 30, 1885 the Alamo church building was formally turned over to the City by the State. On July 27, 1885 Mayor Callaghan appointed Thomas C. Rife, a Mexican War veteran, as custodian of the “sacred” building 81(9), perhaps because Rife had reached retirement age 82(90 pg. 28) (600, pg. 247).  The custodian’s salary was set at $50 per month. The position, officially the “Keeper of the Alamo”, was more commonly called Custodian of the Alamo 83(600, pg. 683).
The Alamo was opened to visitors. On August 1, 1885 the Alamo church building was opened to visitors with Rife as the custodian and tour guide 84(58) (168). According to a newspaper reporter, Rife was selected for the job because he was known to be courteous to strangers and had extensive knowledge of Texas history which he “knows by heart and delights in recounting the history of the past that magnifies the deeds of the patriots, yet withal he is modest and reticent in speaking of his own career” 85(151, pg. 8).
Rife was the only employee at the Alamo. He had no staff and, while the doors and windows could be locked, the building was not fenced in 86(143, pg. 202). On at least two occasions Rife arrived to find that thieves had broken into the Alamo building, forced open the monument contribution box kept there and stole the money in the box 87(163) (806) (705). There was no night watchman 88(633, pg. 20).
Up to twenty out-of-town travelers visited the site each day 89(61) (191) (194) and in an attempt to discourage vandalism of the stone building, Rife kept a supply of broken stone on hand that he had soaked in dirty water until appropriately “antiqued.” He used these stones to accommodate the demand for souvenirs. Occasionally he was forced to expel people who were intent on defacing the building 90(100). To prevent vandalism, Rife guided tourists through the site in groups 91(90, pg. 28) while telling the story of the Alamo “in a manner and a tone so impressive that the mind (of the newspaper reporter) unconsciously (went) back to the story of the Iliad” 92(42, pg. 513).
 The Custodian was the Tour Guide. The text of Rife’s tour is not known nor is it known whether Rife wrote the script of the tour himself or whether others provided it. He had a reputation for veracity 93(98B) (805) but, as an “old veteran” who had arrived in Texas from Louisiana shortly after the Texas Revolution, his opinions were colored by his generation’s prejudice against Mexicans and Indians 94(222, pg. 245) (533, pg. 62) (538) (642, pg. 36) (654, pg. 17). Miss Leonora Bennett, who was the Keeper of the Alamo for five years after 1900, published her version of the tour in 1904 95(659) and earlier versions were paraphrased by newspaper reporters 96(259, pg. 19) and visitors 97(90, pg. 29) (151, pg. 8) and satirized by writers 98(188, pg. 7-13). None of them questioned the basic elements of the Alamo myth. In that myth the Mexicans as a race was generally portrayed as the enemy 99(652, pg. 223) (659, pg. 69) and the Alamo became a racial and nationalistic symbol 100(143, pg. 308) (652, pg. 305-307).
While no written script of Rife’s tour is known to exist, visitors occasionally wrote down what they heard. A New York Herald reporter took the tour when he visited the Alamo in 1893. In his account the tour began with: "Want to see the Alamo?” Rife asked him. When you said that he did, Rife called to a small Mexican boy, "Chico, stand in the door and look out for thieves." He began; "In this hall, the Spanish monks met in devotion. Here is where Travis, Dave Crockett and the rest of them made their last stand, and there is where the bodies of the Texans were piled ten feet high". In a side room, he pointed and said, “In that corner, died Colonel James Bowie. When Santa Anna's troops broke through he was on a pile of straw in that corner sick with Typhoid fever. There was a woman in here with him- a nurse. She tried to protect him but it was no use. They shot and bayoneted him to pieces. Under my feet are the bodies of the monks and priests who served their God in the Alamo. They did not call it the Alamo then. Their name for it was the Church of the Mission of San Antonio de Valera." He continued, "I had a party in here last week. One of the ladies was very fat. I think she must have weighed close to three hundred pounds. I said to her, "You're standing on the graves of the Spanish priests." Just then the ground began to give way with her, and if I hadn't pulled her away I think she would have gone plumb down in the vaults among them bones. Some folks have an idea that Davy Crockett and Bowie and Captain Travis are buried under here somewhere, but there ain't no danger of that. They were all buried--172 of them--right out in the plaza there, and there's an old woman living in this town to-day that seen the whole thing." The reporter’s opinion was that Rife, “… is a student of Alamo history; but, unlike the average guide, he is full of truth" 101(805).
In May 1894 another reporter said that Rife "pointed out to us the place where Col. Crockett lay to the left of the front entrance, nearly covered with dead Mexicans, also the room where Mrs. Dickenson and child, the only survivors, remained during the siege" 102(697).
While it is unknown how Rife learned the details about what occurred at the Alamo on March 6, 1836, pieces of the story were beginning to appear in print as early as 1851. Some were based on eyewitness accounts 103(990) (991). Most accounts were based upon archival material and interviews with individuals who had some hearsay knowledge about the events 104(992) (994). The first comprehensive retelling of events was Yoakum’s history that appeared in 1855 105(993). Yoakum’s History of Texas was followed by other Texas histories in 1888 106(995), 1892 107(996) and 1894 108(997). Each of these texts contained details about what happened before, during and after the fall of the Alamo.
	Whether or not Rife had access these accounts is not known. Even if he did not he heard stories told by many men and women who visited the Alamo and who had some knowledge about the fall of the Alamo that may never have appeared in print. His contacts in the Mexican community should have given him access to eyewitness accounts that were largely ignored by Anglo writers until Miss De Zavala began to publish them after 1894.
The Alamo attracted growing numbers of tourists. Rife’s tour was free of charge although visitors were encouraged to tip the tour guide. After 1881 visitors were also encouraged to put donations in a tin box placed near the exit to by the Alamo Monument Association for the purpose of financing the construction of a monument to be built on Alamo Plaza 109(861).
Visitors to the building signed a registry 110(53) (889) but none of the registration books used during Rife’s tenure are known to exist. It is not known how many people visited the Alamo in the twenty years between 1885 when the tours began and 1905 when the Daughters of the Republic of Texas took possession of the building. Based on newspaper accounts the authors estimate that perhaps 100,000 people visited the Alamo during that twenty-year period 111(160) (191) (194) (696). By the late 1920s that many people visited the Alamo every year 112(143, pg. 228).
In March 1891 Rife was reappointed custodian of the Alamo by the San Antonio City Council during the bi-annual review of City employees following civic elections 113(162). Thomas Rife was an amateur historian and an officer of the Bexar County Association of Mexican War Veterans 114(56) (196) (432). San Antonio newspapers reported on September 16 and 17, 1885 that Rife “has a collection of pictures of noted men” which he invited the public to see 115(10). The collection included photographs of Walter P. Lane, Colonel Jack Hayes, Tom Green, McCulloch, Neally and Frank W. Johnson 116(687).
 Along with hundreds of other old soldiers and their families, Rife attended a reunion of the 32nd Regiment of Texas Cavalry held in San Marcos in July 1886 117(99). A month later, Rife exhibited to a newspaper reporter a document signed by David Crockett while Crockett was Justice of the Peace in Lawrence County, Tennessee in 1818 118(433). In March 1887 a visitor to the Alamo presented Rife with a cannon ball that he had recovered from the site of the Battle of the Salado (against Mexican General Woll in 1843) 119(55).
Rife’s position at the Alamo was not without controversy. In February 1887 Big Foot Wallace visited San Antonio and defended Rife’s military service record against that of other men (specifically Captain C. H. (Rufe) Perry 120(8)) who were vying for the job of Custodian of the Alamo building 121(54) (600, pg. 323). Wallace was a celebrity and his endorsement was important 122(13) (183) (259, pg. 72). Rife frequently attracted attention as the Custodian of the Alamo. In May 1887 Rife arrested E.I. Coyle, the editor of the Southwestern Chronicle, for smashing to pieces a statue that was stored in the Alamo 123(143, pg. 202) (151, pg. 144) (167) (694). Coyle’s arrest resulted in a lawsuit against the City 124(890) and received wide coverage in newspapers.
On March 13, 1888 Judge James Lynch presented a copy of the poem, “The Siege of the Alamo” to Rife, San Antonio Mayor Callaghan and ex-Governor of Texas Ireland at a ceremony at the Alamo 125(59). The poem, which compares the Alamo to Thermopylae (in Greece) and W. B. Travis to Leonidas (a Spartan leader) with “Mexia demons” led by Santa Anna taking the role of the Persians, was included in a souvenir book sold by the Alamo custodian in 1904 126(659, pg. 126).
On August 15, 1888 the San Antonio Reunion Committee organized a two-day reunion of war veterans attended by an estimated 10,000 persons. The veterans camped with their old military comrades at a campground by the San Pedro springs 127(698) and some 800 people visited the Alamo building during the first day. According to the newspaper, “Capt. Tom Rife was here, there and everywhere” during the reunion 128(98) (171).
On February 1, 1889 workmen installing mesquite pavers in Alamo Plaza found a number of six-pound copper cannon balls believed to have been used in the siege of the Alamo in 1836. Rife “managed to get two of the relics, which he is saving as public property at the Alamo...” but the contractor disputed ownership of the others 129(166). Six months later, seven smoothbore cannons were discovered during excavations at the site of the Maverick building “not a stone’s throw from the Alamo. They are of ancient pattern, bear the stamp of Spanish handiwork, are smooth-bores and bell-mouthed. One of them will chamber an eighteen-pound ball.” Although Samuel Maverick and Tom Rife both believed them to have been used in the siege of the Alamo, the cannon were left in the ground and a large stone building was built over them 130(164).
De Zavala Daughters formed to preserve historic buildings. In 1889 Miss De Zavala, a schoolteacher and resident of San Antonio, formed an association of women that became the De Zavala Daughters 131(468, pg. 112). The purpose of the association was to foster patriotism by keeping alive the memory of the “founders and pioneers of Texas”. Miss De Zavala began to gather historical data about San Antonio including paintings, manuscripts, old and rare books and relics. She was particularly interested in the Spanish and Republic of Texas periods. The association repaired Mission San José and hired a custodian to guard it. They placed plaques on historic buildings such as the Veramendi House, the Alamo fort and on the site of Ben Milam’s grave. The De Zavala Daughters affiliated with the Daughters of the Republic of Texas when it was created in 1891 and became the De Zavala Chapter of the DRT 132(604, pg. 213).
Miss De Zavala would have been acquainted with Tom Rife in his role as the custodian of the Alamo church building 133(468, pg. 111). He too collected material relating to the history of San Antonio and gathered relics that he stored in the Alamo 134(55) (166). Many people considered Rife to be an expert on the history of the Alamo 135(19) although we now know that much of what he knew about the Alamo was not factual. There is no evidence that he and Miss De Zavala worked together although they shared similar interests.
While Miss De Zavala examined archival material and collaborated with archivists as far away as Mexico City, Tom Rife probably learned what he knew of the Alamo’s history from the recollections of veterans and survivors who visited the Alamo. In August 1888 an observer commented that, “As a Texas veteran, Indian fighter, scout, Mexican war veteran, U. S. mail carrier on the frontier and as a soldier and scout during the last war he (Capt. Tom Rife) was able to prompt the failing memory of the various narrators as they would hesitate at dates and names, while he was ever ready to prove a veritable stumbling block for any who might try to win cheap glory by drawing on their imagination for their facts” 136(98B).
Rife had little accurate knowledge of events that occurred beyond living memory. As a historian he had numerous critics 137(143, pg. 202). On the same day that Rife died, a letter to the editor of a San Antonio newspaper criticized him in his role as Alamo tour guide for his recital of oral history “which is likely to be inaccurate” 138(247). This letter was signed “Bowie”, perhaps the son of James Bowie who may have nurtured a grudge against Rife for publicly doubting the story wherein David Bowie asked to have his cot carried over Travis’ line in the sand because he was too sick to get up and walk 139(118).
Rife died in 1894 just before the controversy over the Long Barracks erupted 140(468, pp. 120, 121). Little information is available about his views on whether or not the Hugo-Schmeltzer building was a historic structure. He seemed to believe that the Long Barracks had been demolished 141(805) (818) even though he would have known Mr. Schmeltzer who knew that the building played a role in the siege of the Alamo 142(468, pg. 221). By 1890 the question of whether or not the Long Barracks dated to the mission period had become embroiled in politics and Rife may have chosen to avoid the topic 143(259, pg. 122).
Memorial events were held at the Alamo. Before 1889 the anniversary of the fall of the Alamo went largely unnoticed although the anniversaries of Texas independence were celebrated there 144(259, pg. 79). On March 23, 1889, noting that the flag at the Alamo had been flying at half-mast for several days, a San Antonio Express reporter asked Rife about it. He explained that it was to commemorate the fall of the Alamo 145(237) (137).
In April 1891 two years after Rife began marking the anniversary of the fall of the Alamo, the first Battle of the Flowers, which celebrated the Battle of San Jacinto, was held to coincide with the visit of US President Benjamin Harrison to San Antonio. The finale of the Battle of the Flowers centered on the Alamo with a parade to Alamo Plaza and a mock battle between floats using flowers as missiles. In its early years the festival ended with flowers being thrown at the Alamo church 146(259, pg. 88) (640, pg. 63).
Rife expressed his opinion about the Candelaria and Rose controversies. Rife was usually not afraid to take controversial stands on issues relating to the Alamo. On March 25, 1889 he, John Ford and a number of San Antonio elders and officials signed a petition urging the State to grant a pension to Andea Castañon de Villanueva (known as Madam Candelaria) 147(276) (335, pg. 121). Madam Candelaria was an alleged Alamo survivor and a local celebrity 148(90, pg. 29) (92, pp. 19-20) (70, pg. 150). The signers included Hamilton P. Bee, Sam and Mary Maverick, W. Morgan Merrick, William Menger and Sheriff McCall 149(275). Rife, however, publically doubted that either Madam Candelaria or Mr. Rose was telling the truth about their activities at the Alamo 150(150, pg. 77) (189, pg. 180) (468, pg. 89).
In July 1889 Rife told reporters that a biography of Dave Crockett called “A Life of Crockett” was fraudulent. “A Narrative of the Life of David Crockett of the State of Tennessee” was published in 1834 and claimed David Crockett as the author 151(698). In 1888 a play based upon the book (or its sequel) was presented at the Grand Opera House in San Antonio and ignited a controversy 152(862). In an attempt to clear up some of the confusion about Crockett’s history, Rife wrote to Crockett’s son, Robert Patton Crockett, who was living in Hood County, Texas. In reply Rife received a short biography of Crockett’s life that probably clarified details of Crockett’s history, which are today well known. On this basis Rife publically questioned the earlier Crockett biography 153(165).
Rife also expressed his public disbelief in the “Line in the Sand” story. A man named Rose purportedly told friends that he was in the Alamo in March 1836 but left a day before the final assault 154(659, pp. 67, 84) (789, pg. 183). In some versions of his story, he said that he witnessed William Travis draw a line in the sand with his sword and ask those men who were willing to stay and defend the Alamo to step across the line. Rose also claimed that James Bowie, being too ill to stand, asked to have his cot carried across the line 155(118). The story was, and is, firmly entrenched in the public’s mind, yet Rife doubted it 156(670) (669) (780, pg. 68).
Rife was involved in writing the history of the Alamo. In August 1891 Rife was helping Colonel John S. Ford, a historian and newspaper editor, write a book about the Mexican War 157(19). During this period John (Rip) Ford was living in San Antonio and spent hours in San Antonio coffee shops talking with other history buffs and writing historical pieces for newspapers 158(159, pg. xliv). On the day that Rife died, the newspaper announced that Colonel John S. Ford’s book on the Alamo was ready for print 159(20).
The first edition of Ford’s book was called, “History, Battles and Fall of the Alamo: with Points of Interest, Etc, of San Antonio”. It consisted of 34 pages and included a list of those killed in the Alamo 160(272). Ford wrote the book in response to a call by the Alamo Monument Association for a synopsis of the fall of the Alamo. Ford was the first to make a submission and his book was accepted for publication 161(635, pg. 421). Mary Maverick, the wife of Samuel Maverick, a long time resident of San Antonio and President of the Alamo Monument Association, also wrote an account of the events in Béxar in 1835 and 1836 based upon conversations with participants but she decided not to submit her work when she learned that Ford had already submitted his 162(635, pp. 51-56). It is impossible to know how much of Ford’s book and Mrs. Maverick’s manuscript were based upon Thomas Rife’s understanding of what happened at the Alamo in March 1836 but he almost certainly was a contributor.
The Alamo Monument Association formed to build a memorial at the Alamo. The Alamo Monument Association was organized in 1879 for the purposed of building a monument to the men killed at the Alamo after a previous monument disappeared 163(151, pg. 146) (819) (561, pg. 169) (659, pg. 76). In 1884 the group hoped to use the Alamo building as a library or museum 164(820) but by 1893 favored the idea of restoring the building to its pre-1836 condition 165(821). Mrs. Mary A. Maverick was the Association’s President from 1881 until at least 1896 and the officers met monthly in her husband’s office in the Maverick Bank 166(822). The Association’s twenty-five or so Directors included many of the town’s most influential men and women 167(399) (196). The association began collecting money for the monument in 1879 168(823) (824).
While the primary purpose of the association was to erect a monument, they were also interested in restoring the Alamo church. In the last week of January 1893 the association presented to the Legislature a memorial request to the State to restore the Alamo. The request was referred to the appropriate legislative committee. The committee then requested an estimate of expenses to complete the work. An architect, along with Hamilton Bee and Tom Rife made an intelligent and through examination of its present condition and forwarded his report, together with the estimate of the probable cost" to the Legislature 169(703).
While Rife was sick in the spring of 1893 a group of New England investors announced plans to demolish the main building of the Alamo fort (the Hugo-Schmeltzer building or Long Barracks) and build a hotel on the site 170(468, pg. 113). This prompted Miss Adina De Zavala to approach Mr. Gustav Schmeltzer, one of the three owners of the firm of Hugo, Schmeltzer and Co., with the request that, should the property be offered for sale, the De Zavala Daughters be given the first option to purchase it 171(604, pg. 47). Miss De Zavala’s request was the first salvo in a controversy over the building’s future that eventually split the State and City governments and destroyed the De Zavala Daughters. The extent of the involvement of Rife and the Alamo Monument Association in all this is uncertain.
Rife was distracted from this controversy by troubles of his own. A few weeks before Rife returned to his job at the Alamo his oldest son Willie was found guilty of aggravated assault and fined $25 172(124). By November 1894 Rife was again unable to work. Captain William McMaster was appointed acting custodian of the Alamo during Rife’s illness 173(16). Rife was sick for two months 174(89, pg. 46) (566) (568) and on December 27, 1894 he died at his home 175(18) (20) (148).

2.	Keepers of the Alamo, 1885-1905

Thomas Rife, 1885-1894 Thomas Rife was the first custodian of the Alamo to be appointed by the City of San Antonio. He held the position from its inception in 1885 until his death in 1894. He was a long-time city employee who may have been given the position because he was disabled and retired from the police force. Tom Rife was not a veteran of the Battle of San Jacinto but served under Col. Jack Hays during the Mexican War, as a ranger under Captain William Wallace, was a soldier in the 32nd regiment of Texas volunteer cavalry during the Civil War and a scout in West Texas with Captain Henry Skillman. He was wounded at Deer Creek, Mississippi and near Presidio, Texas during the Civil War 176(14).
After a long career as a stage conductor in West Texas he served for six years with the San Antonio police as a patrolman. He was allied with prominent leaders of the San Antonio Mexican community, some of who were also law enforcement officers. He was an outspoken amateur historian who took an active part in efforts to preserve the Alamo church. During his term of office he was paid $50 per month by the City of San Antonio as the Keeper of the Alamo. He was well known and news of his death was widely reported in Texas and beyond 177(734).  
William McMaster, 1894-1897 William McMaster was the second custodian of the Alamo to be appointed by the City of San Antonio. He was born in New Orleans in 1819 and immigrated to Brazoria County in 1835 at age 16 178(676). He was a San Jacinto veteran and was granted 640 acres of Donation Land No. 767 for his part in the Battle of San Jacinto. He served in Capt. Peyton R. Splane’s Company as a private and was assigned to the rear guard in Harrisburg to guard baggage. He received a Soldiers Discharge No. 9010 for 320 acres for a term of three months service from March 6, 1836 to July 7, 1836 179(680). In March 1842 when Mexican General Rafael Vásquez occupied San Antonio, McMaster enlisted in Capt. Gill’s company, Col. C. L. Owen’s command. In 1851 he received $31.50 for his service during the Vasquez campaign 180(679).
In 1860 he and his wife Mary were living in Columbia, Brazoria County where he was a merchant 181(660). The couple had no children 182(867). During the Civil War he was a captain in the Quartermaster’s staff of the 13th Regiment Texas Volunteer Infantry 183(678) in Colonel Joseph Bate’s Regiment (Brazoria Coast Regiment).
McMaster and his wife Mary were living in Brazoria County in 1870 where he described himself as a retired merchant 184(868). He and his wife were running a boarding house. The couple and the wife’s aunt moved to San Antonio about 1877 and built one of the first houses on San Pedro Avenue. Between 1880 and 1893 McMaster was a US Deputy Marshal 185(869) (826, pg. 204) (863, pg. 223) (864, pg. 234) (865, pg. 455).  
McMaster applied for the position of Keeper of the Alamo when the position was first created in 1885 186(600, pg. 323). He became the acting custodian in December 1894 while Rife was ill 187(667). He was reappointed in January 1897 and kept the position until the spring of 1897 188(13). William McMaster died May 09, 1907 189(660).
Samuel C. Bennett, 1897-1899 Sam C. Bennett was born in 1827 in Missouri and was a wholesale grocer in Chicago from 1861 until 1865 doing business under the name Bennett, Staley and Gregory. He later ran a wholesale grocery business in Kansas City, Missouri 190(870). He arrived in San Antonio before 1876 bringing all of his surviving children with him 191(871) (872) (873).
There were three men named Samuel Bennett in San Antonio during this period. Two were prominent businessmen and were often confused with each other. Usually reporters clearly distinguished between Sam W. Bennett who was a San Antonio banker and Sam C. Bennett, the merchant and rancher. Sam W. Bennett was quite wealthy. Sam C. Bennett 192(828) (829) (830) (831) was a sheep rancher 193(671) and merchant 194(832) (833) (834) (835) (836) (837). It was he who worked as the Alamo tour guide. Between 1897 and 1900 Samuel Bennett was listed in San Antonio City Directories as the custodian of the Alamo 195(838, pg. 158).
According to an article in the newspaper dated May 13, 1897, The Alamo Monument Association kept a box on the wall of the Alamo for contributions to the fund. In connection with this box, a reporter mentioned that the custodian had a small book explaining the history of the Alamo that he had printed at his own expense. The custodian sold the book to visitors upon request 196(672). In late 1893, while Thomas Rife was still alive, a reporter for the New York Herald noted that there was a guidebook available 197(805) but 1897 was the first mention of a printed text of the Alamo tour. Sam Bennett’s daughter, who later served as the Alamo tour guide, greatly expanded this text.  
Bennett supervised a thorough cleaning of the Alamo building. During the cleaning, he reported that he found traces of blood under the whitewash of the interior walls 198(673). Notwithstanding earlier efforts to remove debris from the Alamo church, Bennett had twenty-one cartloads of dirt and rubbish removed from the building in 1897 199(672). He also removed was what was left of the wooden floors installed by the US Army fifty years before 200(675).
Sam C. Bennett was cited in various sources as Custodian of the Alamo between April 1897 and April 1899 201(672) (848, pg. 158). He died on January 15, 1900 at age 72 years old, apparently while he was still employed as the Alamo custodian. The flags at the Alamo and City Hall were flown at half-mast during his funeral service 202(671).
Leonora (Lea) Bennett, 1900-1905 Lea Bennett was the daughter of Sam C. Bennett. After her father’s death she was appointed temporary custodian on January 18, 1900 203(663) and held the position until June 8, 1905. She was paid $50 a month, the same as the men who held the position 204(665). She was 38 years old in 1900. Leonora Bennett was born in Missouri in 1862 205(870) and moved with her parents to San Antonio. All of her siblings were still at home in 1880. The two boys, aged 19 and 21, were working as clerks in their father’s store 206(871).
Leonora’s father (and her predecessor as the Keeper of the Alamo) printed at his own expense a slim volume that he sold on his own account to visitors to the Alamo for fifteen cents 207(672). Leonora Bennett enlarged this historical sketch and in 1904 published a book called “Historical Sketch and Guide to the Alamo”. The first 81 pages of the 131-page book is a history of Texas from the appearance of Sieur de la Salle in 1685, through the careers of Philip Nolan, Augustus Magee and Moses Austin and ending with the battle of San Jacinto. Pages 83 to 107 contain four “historical sketches” which are probably the text of the tour given to visitors during the period between 1897 and 1905 when she or her father were the tour guides. This part of the book may have been based upon the booklet that Sam Bennett printed and sold to visitors. Following the text of the tour there is a short history of the other San Antonio missions including the San Fernando church. Parts 4 and 5 of Miss Bennett’s book are three poems about the Alamo and a list of the Alamo martyrs 208(659, pg. 122-131). In 1905, after Miss Bennett’s time as the Keeper of the Alamo ended, she continued to live with her sister at the family home on Dwyer Avenue 209(874) (875) (839).
Samuel Lytle, 1893, 1905. Samuel Lytle was the last Keeper of the Alamo to be appointed by the San Antonio City Council under the agreement reached with the State of Texas in 1883. In 1905, after the State purchased the Long Barracks from the firm of Hugo-Schmeltzer, it and the Alamo church (which was already State property) was given in custody to the Daughters of the Republic of Texas. A long legal battle followed as two factions struggled to control the organization and the Alamo properties. At some point during this struggle the City relinquished control of the old church to a representative of the DRT. The position of Keeper of the Alamo was abolished sometime during this period.
The last city-employed Keeper of the Alamo was an old friend of the first man who held that position. William Lytle, a blacksmith, arrived in Washington-on-the-Brazos from Tennessee with his wife and his son Samuel Lytle on December 15, 1838 210(587, pg. 2205). Eleven-year-old Samuel Lytle met Tom Rife in Washington-on-the-Brazos in 1842 and they became friends.
Like Rife, Sam soon found himself in Bexar County. William Lytle established a stock ranch on the Medina River in 1846 211(876) (877) and Samuel and older brother were witnesses to the marriage of Thomas Rife to Mary Ann Brothers in 1853 212(140). He was a neighbor of William (Big Foot) Wallace 213(339, pg. 119) and was with him during a fight with Indians in Medina County in September 1855 214(674) (841).  
In April 1860 Samuel Lytle enlisted in a company of minutemen 215(134). On May 10, 1862 he mustered into Company H, 32nd Regiment Texas Cavalry where he was elected 2nd Lieutenant. He remained with this unit throughout the War 216(671) (587, pg. 2205) and was promoted to Captain 217(592, pg. 286). By March 1863 he was on detached service at Eagle Pass in pursuit of deserters. When Thomas Rife returned from Mississippi in the fall of 1863, he enlisted in Samuel Lytle’s company but was soon detached for service with Henry Skillman’s scouts in West Texas.
In 1880 Lytle’s wife, his son and three daughters were living in San Antonio. All of the school age children were in school 218(879). Lytle lived on his ranch on the Medina River until 1887 219(587, pg. 2205) (843, pg. 250) (844, pg. 261) (845, pg. 430). Lytle was a Director of the Alamo Monument Association in 1891 220(661) and again in 1894 221(662). The Alamo Monument Association had a membership of 50 persons 222(846) (847, pg. 54). Individual members of the association were involved in other efforts to preserve the early history of San Antonio but the Alamo Monument Association itself appeared to focus exclusively on the monument they planned to build. To this end the association advocated for, or at least did not oppose, the demolition of the Long Barracks.
In March 1893 Captain Samuel Lytle sought appointment as Custodian of the Alamo after the municipal elections when all city positions were up for grabs. His old friend, Tom Rife, successfully retained the appointment 223(666). However by September 1893 Rife was sick and Captain Lytle became acting custodian at the Alamo 224(22) (185). Lytle was a Director of the Alamo Monument Association at the time 225(399). In February 1894, by a motion of Alderman Smith, the San Antonio City Council voted to allow Tom Rife to assume his position as custodian of the Alamo “as he has recovered” 226(11).
Lytle became the Alamo keeper again in June 1905 and was paid $38.35 for a partial month (23 days) on July 3, 1905. In 1903 Miss De Zavala requested that a member of the De Zavala Chapter be placed on the committee to select the Alamo custodian but the choice was left in the hands of the Mayor 227(1006, pg. 378). On July 31, 1905 Lytle was paid $50 for a full month as the Custodian 228(665) and he was finally appointed the permanent keeper on September 17, 1905. The next month, on October 4, 1905, the Daughters (DRT) officially received custody of the building from the State of Texas. After his position at the Alamo was terminated, Lytle remained in San Antonio 229(882, pg. 392) (881, pg. 376) (880) (883) (884) (885). His daughters, especially Nellie Lytle, were friends and associates of Miss De Zavala and they continued to advocate for the preservation of the Alamo 230(468, pg. 131) (886) (887) (1006, pg. 384). Sam Lytle died in 1918 231(587, pg. 2205).
In April 1905 the DRT named the De Zavala Chapter caretakers of the Alamo for one year 232(1006, pg. 384). In August 1905 the title to the Hugo-Schmeltzer Building was transferred to the State and in October the DRT was given custody of both the Hugo-Schmeltzer building and the Alamo chapel. Adina De Zavala was the President of the DRT chapter in San Antonio and San Antonio Mayor Callaghan gave her the keys to the chapel on October 11, 1905 233(1006, page 386). The month before Miss Driscoll had appointed her friend Miss Florence Eagar to serve as Custodian of the Alamo 234(1006, pg. 386). Miss Eagar was a member of the De Zavala Chapter 235(1017). The Custodian was initially paid $45 per month 236(1006, pg. 394).
After the Daughters were given custody of the buildings, a long struggle commenced between two factions in the DRT that eventually ended with the partial destruction of one of the buildings the DRT was sworn to protect. In November 1905 the two factions struggled over which faction controlled the keys to the chapel. Miss De Zavala refused to give the key to Miss Eagar and on November 3, 1905 the Driscoll faction filed suit against Miss De Zavala for possession of the key 237(1006, pg. 387). The following April a new DRT chapter, the Alamo Mission Chapter, seceded from the De Zavala Chapter and was recognized as the only San Antonio chapter of the DRT. The De Zavala Chapter was expelled from the DRT and the struggle between the two groups continued until 1913 when the City demolished the upper story of the convent at the insistence of the executive committee of the DRT 238(1006, pg. 412).
The Daughters of the Republic of Texas, 1905-present When the Daughters of the Republic of Texas received custody of the two remaining buildings of the old Alamo mission in 1905, they appointed one of their members, Miss Florence Eagar, to act as the Custodian of the Alamo. Florence Eagar was the inspiration for Miss Clara Driscoll’s 1906 short story, “In the Shadow of the Alamo” 239(998). In that book Miss Driscoll spelled out the Alamo myth that the DRT promoted until recent times. Miss Eagar drew the illustrations used in the book.
In 1907 Miss Eagar married US Army Major Harris L. Roberts and left San Antonio 240(1007) (1008) just as did the heroine in Miss Driscoll’s story. Mrs. Robert’s mother, Mrs. Sarah Eagar, replaced Florence as the Custodian 241(891). Mrs. Eagar was 65 years old when she took on the role of custodian and tour guide. She was still the Custodian in 1913 when she was 71 years old 242(1009, pg. 312). Although they had misgiving about its veracity, the tour given by Florence and her mother was similar to that of the City custodians who had preceded them 243(1007).
In 1915, Mrs. Fannie Applewhite became President of the Alamo Mission Chapter of the DRT. By then the Alamo Mission Chapter had assumed day-to-day control of the Alamo and Mrs Applewhite was appointed Custodian of the Alamo. The budget for the Custodians was $900 per year 244(1006, pg. 397). The Alamo Mission chapter held its meetings in the Alamo chapel so Mrs. Applewhite could attend to visitors during the chapter meetings. In 1916 Judge Webb, who was the husband of a past president of the chapter, agreed to pay the wages of a gardener to care for the extensive gardens surrounding the chapel. The gardener was the second employee of the DRT at the Alamo 245(1011).
Mrs. Applewhite served as custodian until 1921 when she retired for reasons of age. Her daughter, Mrs. Leita Small, followed her as Custodian of the Alamo and kept the position until 1946 246(1010). Mrs. Small died August 30, 1946 at age 65, apparently while still Custodian 247(1012). Mrs. Small was the last individual to be known as the “Custodian of the Alamo”.
By the time Mrs. Small died the Alamo had a maintenance and library staff that included a full-time Grounds Superintendent, Mr. Herbert R. Newcomer 248(1013).  The number of visitors and the size of the Alamo staff continued to grow decade by decade. When Mr. Newcomer retired in 1961 240(1014) the person in charge of buildings of the Alamo was known as the Superintendent of Buildings and Grounds 250(1015). The term “Custodian” or “Keeper” as it was used around the turn of the 19th Century had become an anachronism.






















---------------------------------
